=head1 Name

lua-oocairo-fontopt - options controlling text rendering

=head1 Introduction

A font options object contains options that tell Cairo how to render
text on surfaces.  They can be created with the C<font_options_create>
function in the main oocairo module (see L<lua-oocairo(3)>), and
retrieved from scaled fonts or context objects with C<get_font_options>
methods.

Font options objects can be compared with the C<==> operator.  Two different
objects with the same options set will be considered equal.

=head1 Methods

The following methods are available on font options objects:

=over

=item opt:copy ()

Returns a new font options object, with identical options to I<opt>.
The two objects will be completely independent, so you can set them to
have different options.

=item opt:get_antialias ()

Get the current antialiasing mode, which will be one of the strings accepted
by the C<opt:set_antialias()> method.

=item opt:get_hint_metrics ()

Returns the current hint metrics option, which will be one of the same strings
accepted by the C<opt:set_hint_metrics()> method.

=item opt:get_hint_style ()

Get the kind of font hinting done when rendering text.  Returns one of
the strings accepted by the C<opt:set_hint_style()> method.

=item opt:get_subpixel_order ()

Returns the current ordering of colour components in pixels used for
subpixel rendering, which will be one of the same strings
accepted by the C<opt:set_subpixel_order()> method.

=item opt:hash ()

Return a number which can be used as a hash key identifying the particular
options in I<opt>.  That is, if you wanted to cache fonts according to
the options set on them, you could store them in a table with this hash
value as the key.  Two font options objects with the same options will
have the same hash value.

=item opt:merge (srcopt)

Add any options which are set to a non-default value in I<srcopt> to I<opt>
if that still has the default value from them.  The options in I<srcopt>
will be unchanged.  Nothing is returned.

=item opt:set_antialias (antialiastype)

Set the antialiasing mode used for drawing.  The argument must be a string
or boolean value accepted by the C<set_antialias> method on context objects
(see L<lua-oocairo-context(3)>).

=item opt:set_hint_metrics (hintmetrics)

Set the kind of hinting to be applied to the metrics, as opposed to outlines,
of the glyphs in a font.  The I<hintmetrics> value must be one of the
following strings:

=over

=item default

=item off

=item on

=back

=item opt:set_hint_style (hintstyle)

Set the kind of font hinting done when rendering text.  The I<hintstyle>
value must be one of the following strings:

=over

=item default

=item none

=item slight

=item medium

=item full

=back

=item opt:set_subpixel_order (order)

Used to inform Cairo of the arrangement of colour components in the pixels
of a display device like a monitor.  Only applies if subpixel antialiasing
is used.  The I<order> value must be one of the following strings:

=over

=item default

=item rgb

=item bgr

=item vrgb

=item vbgr

=back

The last two options refer to vertical arrangements of colours.

=back

=for comment
vi:ts=4 sw=4 expandtab
